---
title:
  "Manual Review Best Practices: What’s the Value of Assessing IP Address Risk?"
date: "2015-07-29"
category:
  - "Online Fraud Detection"
tag:
  - "Anonymizer and Proxy Detection"
  - "Risk Scoring"
authors:
  - "The Team at MaxMind"
---

In this blog post, we continue our discussion of best practices for manual
review. Today’s topic is assessing IP address risk.

A fraudster (or indeed, anyone) placing an order on a website uses a device
(computer, mobile phone or tablet) and this device is associated with an
[IP address](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_address).

In our last blog post, we discussed how the physical location of the IP address
can be matched against other location information to see if anything looks
suspicious. For example, it’s best to closely scrutinize orders where the
location of an IP address is in one country and the billing address in another.

Fraudsters recognize the power of geolocation in identifying fraud, so they act
to hide their actual IP address and, by extension, their geographic location.
The best way for them to take cover is to connect to the Internet using a proxy
server. Popular hiding places include
[open proxies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_proxy),
[hosting providers](https://www.spamhaus.org/news/article/687/how-hosting-providers-can-battle-fraudulent-sign-ups)
and [VPNs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network).

Since proxies are a place to find fraudsters, it stands to reason that
identifying an IP address as a proxy increases the risk associated with it. But
proxy detection provides only part of the picture. Proxies change frequently, so
that an IP address that was a proxy today will not necessarily be a proxy
tomorrow. And there are legitimate reasons to use a proxy. For example, while a
fraudster might use a VPN to hide shady activity, corporations also use VPNs to
provide access to corporate computing assets by geographically dispersed offices
as well as to employees who work remotely or are traveling.

To provide a deeper understanding of IP address risk,
[minFraud](https://www.maxmind.com/en/minfraud-services) generates a
\*proxyScore\*\* for each transaction. The proxyScore indicates how likely it is
that the traffic from an IP originated from a fraudster. This score is based on
data from the minFraud network, a database of over 500 million rolling
transactions generated by a broad spectrum of merchants worldwide. Analysis of
the history of traffic from the IP address takes into consideration more than
proxy identification. For example, if a customer reports a chargeback in
association with a transaction, the minFraud network uses this information to
increase the proxyScore of that IP address.

minFraud assesses IP address risk and returns a proxyScore for each of your
transactions. During manual review, refer to the proxyScore to get some sense of
whether there are good or bad guys behind the IP address. But, as always, keep
in mind that the proxyScore is one of the many data points to factor into your
manual review process. To get a full picture of the risk assessment provided by
the minFraud network, it’s especially helpful to take a look at riskScore in the
light of the proxyScore for a transaction. Looking at these two scores together
may prove conclusive - or compel you to weigh other factors before coming to a
final decision.

\* _minFraud Insights provides an IP risk score in place of the proxyScore._
