---
title: "GeoIP Services Ensure Fomo’s Customers Don’t “Miss Out” on Sales"
date: "2017-06-05"
category:
  - "IP Geolocation and Network Data"
tag:
  - "Case Studies"
  - "eCommerce"
  - "Geofiltering and Geofencing"
authors:
  - "The Team at MaxMind"
---

Every year, more than a billion
[consumers](https://www.digitalcommerce360.com/2015/03/31/number-global-online-shoppers-will-grow-50-2018/)
shop on e-commerce websites. And in 2016, a new startup called Fomo set out to
help merchants reach that audience. To do that, Fomo first needed to find a
service partner with expertise in geolocation. They chose MaxMind. “We’re a
relatively new company, but our growth has been phenomenal since we added
MaxMind’s GeoIP2 Precision services,” said Fomo’s co-founder Ryan Kulp.

Within five months of using [GeoIP2 Precision services (Country and
City)](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-precision-services), Fomo has curated
more than 100,000 unique browsing transactions for their e-commerce partners and
helped their clients achieve double-digit growth in consumer adoptions. For
example, Sphynx, a manufacturer of pocket-sized electric shavers, achieved a
49.6% increase in their transactional conversions after they enabled GeoIP2
Precision services through Fomo’s API. Another client, TidyMe, a large cleaning
service in Australia, has seen its conversions increase by 12%. “Introducing
MaxMind into our offering has been a game changer for us,” said Kulp. “Growth
like that is not possible without a reliable geolocation provider like MaxMind.”

## Snapshot

Fomo helps websites optimize their conversions through social proof marketing.
Originally a [plugin on Shopify called Notify](https://apps.shopify.com/fomo),
the company changed its name to Fomo (short for "fear of missing out") and began
establishing its own identity outside of the e-commerce giant. The Fomo plugin
uses GeoIP2 Precision services to determine the geographic location of website
users. The intent is to localize user interactions and transactional behaviors
such as purchases, sign-ups and comments. That intelligence is displayed in
real-time notifications that appear on websites (click
[here](https://www.usefomo.com/solutions/super-sized) to see Fomo in action).
It’s the online equivalent of a busy restaurant, showing prospective customers
social proof that other people also visit and interact with a website.

Social proof is a relatively new branch of marketing that borrows from the
[psychological phenomenon](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_proof) known as
Informational Social Influence. Social proof marketing advocates follow the
principle that [customers seek influence from their
peers](https://www.forbes.com/sites/miketempleman/2017/04/03/6-ways-to-integrate-social-proof-in-your-saas-marketing-strategy/#7e27d93585f8)
before making a decision. In fact, Fomo is aptly named. The concept of “missing
out” is ingrained in those who are [hooked on social
media](https://psychcentral.com/blog/fear-of-missing-out). “People feel
comfortable buying from a website they know other people are buying from,” said
Kulp. “With Fomo and MaxMind, people visiting e-commerce shops can see, for
example, that John just purchased a shirt 2 minutes ago and where he is from.
Showing those interactions creates urgency and increases on-page conversions.”

## Challenge

Fomo’s business goal has always been to increase customer conversions. But, as
Fomo began to work with large global clients, they found out quickly those
companies wanted a method to localize their customer interactions. Kulp believes
that Fomo’s notifications without a geolocation solution would be far less
effective for social proof marketing. “GeoIP2 Precision services enable us to
personalize those notifications for our clients so that users only see the
interactions which their neighbors are making,” Kulp said.

So, what drove Fomo to choose MaxMind? “We wanted a geolocation service with a
dedicated team behind it that is maintaining it, that is constantly improving
it. We also wanted really fast query times and a high level of accuracy,” Kulp
said. “We evaluated three to five different solutions and, with everything
considered, it was a no-brainer to go with MaxMind.”

## Future

Kulp believes Fomo’s growth is ultimately tied to new uses for geolocation
intelligence, especially as social media continues to grow in popularity. “We
expect the future of the web to be more localized, and MaxMind will play a major
role in sites providing localized content,” Kulp said.

In the next few months, Kulp estimates that with GeoIP2 Precision services
helping to fuel the company’s growth, Fomo will be processing tens of millions
of localized, geocoded interactions for many e-commerce stores throughout the
world. “We set out to solve a very specific problem for our clients, and are
thrilled with the results we’ve seen since choosing MaxMind as our partner.”

* * *

To find out more about MaxMind’s GeoIP2 Precision services or to request a free
trial, simply click
[here](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-precision-services).
