---
title: "Discontinuation of the GeoLite Legacy Databases"
date: "2018-01-02"
category:
  - "IP Geolocation and Network Data"
tag:
  - "GeoLite Free IP Geolocation"
  - "Product Updates"
authors:
  - "The Team at MaxMind"
---

#### Important Update April 11, 2018.
[Latitude and Longitude Will Remain in the GeoLite2
Databases.](https://blog.maxmind.com/2018/04/11/we-are-listening-latitude-and-longitude-will-remain-in-geolite2-databases/)

* * *

Free and open source code has been part of MaxMind’s technical and
organizational foundation since our earliest days. As we continue to develop new
products to better service our customers with a broader range of diverse and
innovative offerings, we occasionally find it necessary to discontinue or phase
out some of our products or services.

Accordingly, we have decided to discontinue the GeoLite Legacy databases on
January 2, 2019. _(Note that we will begin by discontinuing updates to the free
GeoLite Legacy databases as of April 1, 2018. For info, see the "Important dates
to consider" section.)_

## **How does this affect me?**

You will still be able to receive open source geolocation data from us, but you
may need to take action depending on what database you are using.

### GeoLite Legacy users

If you are using the GeoLite Legacy databases, you will need to switch to the
[GeoLite2 databases](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geoip2/geolite2/) and update
your integrations to use the GeoLite2 databases before January 2, 2019 to ensure
your continued access to geolocation data.

Another option is to switch to the paid [GeoIP
Legacy](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/legacy/downloadable/) equivalent of the
database you are using. In that way, you would be able to continue to use your
existing integrations. You may also want to consider upgrading to the [GeoIP2
brand](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-services-and-databases). (_Please note
that since the GeoIP Legacy databases have been superseded by_ GeoIP2_, the
GeoIP Legacy databases may also be discontinued at some point in the future.)_

### GeoLite2 Developer’s Package customers

If you use the [GeoLite2 Developer’s
Package](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite2-developer-package) and are already
using the GeoLite2 databases, you will not be affected by the discontinuation of
the GeoLite Legacy databases. Also, your [commercial redistribution
license](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite-commercial-redistribution-license)
will not be affected as long as you are using the GeoLite2 databases.

## **Important dates to consider**

To make sure you have plenty of time to transition away from the GeoLite Legacy
databases, we will be phasing out the databases gradually leading up to January
2, 2019. Here are some important dates and milestones of which you should be
aware:

- **April 1, 2018** – Updated versions of the GeoLite Legacy databases are now
only available to [redistribution license
customers](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geolite-commercial-redistribution-license),
although anyone can continue to download the March 2018 GeoLite Legacy builds.

- **January 2, 2019** – The remaining GeoLite Legacy builds will be removed from
our website. GeoLite Legacy database users will need to have switched to the
[GeoLite2](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geoip2/geolite2/) or [commercial
GeoIP](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-services-and-databases) databases and
update their integrations.

## **Commitment to the principles of open source**

Open source is about more than just code; it's about community and process.
Participating in open source projects and communities comes with its own unique
set of challenges. We view open source as an important component of our services
and will continue to offer free, open source data through our [GeoLite2 free
downloadable databases](https://dev.maxmind.com/geoip/geoip2/geolite2/).

The difficult business decision to discontinue the GeoLite Legacy databases came
about after careful analysis and thought. These types of decisions are never
easy and we will continue to focus on delivering high-value experiences that
benefit the majority of our users while ensuring that we can continue to offer
collaborative, connected, and intelligent offerings.

We would like to thank every GeoLite Legacy database user who trusted and relied
on us all these years. Your support has been tremendously important to us and
sincerely appreciated.

* * *

Founded in 2002, MaxMind is an industry-leading provider of IP intelligence and
online fraud detection tools. We provide IP intelligence through our GeoIP
brand. Over 5,000 companies use GeoIP data to locate their internet visitors and
show them relevant content and ads, enforce digital rights, and efficiently
route internet traffic.  Our minFraud service helps businesses prevent
fraudulent online transactions and reduce manual review. The minFraud service is
used to screen more than 175 million e-commerce transactions and account
registrations a month.
