---
title: "Going Local: How MaxMind Helps GeoFli’s Customers’ Conversion Rates Soar"
date: "2018-01-02"
category:
  - "IP Geolocation and Network Data"
tag:
  - "Case Studies"
  - "eCommerce"
  - "Geofiltering and Geofencing"
authors:
  - "The Team at MaxMind"
---

Digitally savvy consumers are [increasingly seeking online
experiences](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/marketing-and-sales/our-insights/what-shoppers-really-want-from-personalized-marketing)
tailored to their interests; meanwhile, web personalization companies like
[GeoFli](https://geofli.com/) are increasingly seeking ways to deliver just the
right experiences to those consumers, at the right time.

“We wanted to create a service to display website content based on a visitor’s
IP address,” said GeoFli co-founder Nick Shontz. “Using MaxMind’s GeoIP2 City
database combined with GeoFli's custom software, we have seen conversion rates
double for our customers. It’s great having an industry-leading tool like GeoIP2
City that’s so easy to integrate with our systems and have such great
application and scalability,” Shontz added.

As co-founder Kyle Pucko explains: “One customer, an app developer, measured
their conversions by counting the number of downloads. Before using our
solution, their conversion rate was less than 3% historically. Using GeoFli, the
customers conversion rate rose to around 7% in just 30 days.” Another customer,
[UPTOP](https://teamuptop.com/), a lifestyle clothing brand in Montana, was
experiencing a high bounce rate of 60% on their homepage. “People were visiting
the homepage, but were leaving before UPTOP could try to convert them,” Pucko
said. After 30 days of using GeoFli software sourced by MaxMind’s data, the
number of users that landed on UPTOP’s homepage and visited a second page
increased 92%.

## **SNAPSHOT**

Web-based personalization is [becoming increasingly
popular](https://www.businessinsider.com/shoppers-expect-more-personalization-2017-10?r=UK&IR=T)
among online companies and digital marketers. The practice allows a business to
identify, segment, and target their visitors in order to serve them personalized
content based on some identifiable attribute of the visitor - such as
geographical location, browsing history, and demographic data.

In GeoFli’s case, the company identifies visitors through the process of
[geotargeting](https://geofli.com/geotargeting-101/). This practice allows
websites to serve specific content to visitors based on their geographic
location - usually their country, state, or city via their IP address.

GeoFli first reviews the IP address of each visitor. They then do a lookup of
that IP address in the GeoIP2 City database in order to determine the visitor’s
approximate location. “It’s about delivering the most important, useful content
to them at the exact moment they are on a site,” said Taylor McDermott, GeoFli’s
online strategist.

GeoFli’s user interface (UI) features a very simple [point-and-click
layout](https://geofli.com/support/getting-started). Customers select a
geographical radius they would like to target through one of three options:
Location Library (pre-defined regions), Radius Targeting (a numerical distance -
such as 50, 100, etc. miles - from a central point), or Custom Draw (where the
user literally draws a polygonal region on a map). GeoFli enables its customers
to create website content only visible to internet users originating from IP
addresses within a geographic area. So, everyone inside that radius sees
specific, localized content relevant to them. Others, (for example, website
visitors from Japan) would see regular, nonspecific content. “The software can
be used in many different ways, including showing restaurant offers, retail
promotions, local news, and community headlines to a specific subset of internet
users,” Shontz said.

## **CHALLENGE**

GeoFli co-founders Shontz and Pucko built the service while working together in
web development and admissions (respectively) at the University of Montana.
According to Shontz, their biggest initial challenges were coming up with a
solution that is easy for anyone to use and finding a geolocation service
provider whose offerings were reliable, well-regarded, and fast.

Shontz and Pucko searched online for a provider, but could not find exactly what
they were looking for. Then a friend told them about MaxMind. “You offered
everything we needed: a reliable, industry leader who maintains and updates
their product,” Shontz said, adding, “The great thing about MaxMind’s GeoIP2
database – I don’t have to worry about it. It’s fast, updated, and easy to
integrate into our code. Because of that, I can just focus on running my
business.”

## **FUTURE**

Personalization is [forecast to rule the digital landscape in
2017](https://www.adweek.com/digital/is-personalization-the-new-buzz-for-2017-infographic/)
and beyond. Shontz feels that GeoFli is well-positioned to take advantage of the
growing demand for personalization services. “Industries can use us to solve new
problems and find new uses for our software – especially in the world of higher
education, where we first thought of GeoFli,” Shontz said.

Moving forward, the “sky’s the limit” for GeoFli. “Everyone is thinking about
how to make emails and ads more personal,” said McDermott, adding, “Instead, we
want to make our customers relevant at one of the first points of contact with
their consumers – a website. We have a tool in GeoFli that no other geomarketer
has and a great partner in MaxMind behind us to do just that.”

* * *

Founded in 2002, MaxMind is an industry-leading provider of IP intelligence and
online fraud detection products. To learn more about how our GeoIP databases and
services can help you, please visit our
[website](https://www.maxmind.com/en/geoip2-services-and-databases) or [contact
us](https://www.maxmind.com/en/sales_contact).
